Capitalize: What It Is and What It Means When a Cost Is Capitalized
By ADAM HAYES

Full Bio
 
 
Adam Hayes, Ph.D., CFA, is a financial writer with 15+ years Wall Street experience as a derivatives trader. Besides his extensive derivative trading expertise, Adam is an expert in economics and behavioral finance. Adam received his master's in economics from The New School for Social Research and his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in sociology. He is a CFA charterholder as well as holding FINRA Series 7, 55 & 63 licenses. He currently researches and teaches economic sociology and the social studies of finance at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem.

Learn about our editorial policies 
 Updated June 26, 2023
Reviewed by MARGARET JAMES
Fact checked by KATRINA MUNICHIELLO
What Is to Capitalize?
To capitalize is to record a cost or expense on the balance sheet for the purposes of delaying full recognition of the expense. In general, capitalizing expenses is beneficial as companies acquiring new assets with long-term lifespans can amortize or depreciate the costs. This process is known as capitalization.

Capitalization may also refer to the concept of converting some idea into a business or investment. In finance, capitalization is a quantitative assessment of a firm's capital structure. When used this way, it sometimes also means to monetize.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
To capitalize is to record a cost or expense on the balance sheet for the purposes of delaying full recognition of the expense.
Capitalization is used in corporate accounting to match the timing of cash flows.
In finance, capitalization is a reference to a company's capital structure, or the total of a company's long-term debt, stock, and retained earnings.
Capitalize
Investopedia / Jake Shi

Understanding How to Capitalize
One of the most important principles of accounting is the matching principle. The matching principle states that expenses should be recorded for the period incurred regardless of when payment (e.g., cash) is made. Recognizing expenses in the period incurred allows businesses to identify amounts spent to generate revenue. For assets that are immediately consumed, this process is simple and sensible.

However, large assets that provide a future economic benefit present a different opportunity. For example, a company purchases a delivery truck for daily operations. The truck is expected to provide value over a period of 12 years. Instead of expensing the entire cost of the truck when purchased, accounting rules allow companies to write off the cost of the asset over its useful life (12 years).

In other words, the asset is written off as it is used. Most companies have an asset threshold, in which assets valued over a certain amount are automatically treated as a capitalized asset.

Benefits of Capitalization
Capitalizing assets has many benefits. Because long-term assets are costly, expensing the cost over future periods reduces significant fluctuations in income, especially for small firms. Many lenders require companies to maintain a specific debt-to-equity ratio. If large long-term assets were expensed immediately, it could compromise the required ratio for existing loans or could prevent firms from receiving new loans.

Also, capitalizing expenses increases a company's asset balance without affecting its liability balance. As a result, many financial ratios will appear favorable. Despite this benefit, it should not be the motivation for capitalizing on an expense.

Depreciation
The process of writing off an asset over its useful life is referred to as depreciation, which is used for fixed assets, such as equipment. Amortization is used for intangible assets, such as intellectual property. Depreciation deducts a certain value from the asset every year until the full value of the asset is written off the balance sheet.

Income Statement
Depreciation is an expense recorded on the income statement; it is not to be confused with "accumulated depreciation," which is a balance sheet contra account. The income statement depreciation expense is the amount of depreciation expensed for the period indicated on the income statement. 

The accumulated depreciation balance sheet contra account is the cumulative total of depreciation expense recorded on the income statements from the asset's acquisition until the time indicated on the balance sheet.

Leased Equipment
For leased equipment, capitalization is the conversion of an operating lease to a capital lease by classifying the leased asset as a purchased asset, which is recorded on the balance sheet as part of the company's assets. The value of the asset that will be assigned is either its fair market value or the present value of the lease payments, whichever is less. Also, the amount of principal owed is recorded as a liability on the balance sheet.

 There are strict regulatory guidelines and best practices for capitalizing assets and expenses.
Market Capitalization
Another aspect of capitalization refers to the company's capital structure. Capitalization can refer to the book value of capital, which is the sum of a company's long-term debt, stock, and retained earnings, which represents a cumulative savings of profit or net income.

The alternative to the book value is market value. The market value of capital depends on the price of the company's stock. It is calculated by multiplying the price of the company’s stock by the number of equity shares outstanding in the market. If the total number of shares outstanding is 1 billion, and the stock is currently priced at $10, the market capitalization is $10 billion.

Companies with a high market capitalization are referred to as large caps; companies with medium market capitalization are referred to as mid-caps, while companies with small capitalization are referred to as small caps.

It is possible to be overcapitalized or undercapitalized. Overcapitalization occurs when earnings are not enough to cover the cost of capital, such as interest payments to bondholders, or dividend payments to shareholders. Dividends are cash payments made to shareholders by companies. Undercapitalization occurs when there's no need for outside capital because profits are high and earnings were underestimated.

Capitalized Cost vs. Expense
When trying to discern what a capitalized cost is, it’s first important to make the distinction between what is defined as a cost and an expense in the world of accounting. A cost on any transaction is the amount of money used in exchange for an asset.

A company buying a forklift would mark such a purchase as a cost. An expense is a monetary value leaving the company; this would include something like paying the electricity bill or rent on a building.

The use of the word capital to refer to a person's wealth comes from the Medieval Latin capitale, for "stock, property."

Limitations of Capitalizing
To capitalize assets is an important piece of modern financial accounting and is necessary to run a business. However, financial statements can be manipulated—for example, when a cost is expensed instead of capitalized. If this occurs, current income will be understated while it will be inflated in future periods over which additional depreciation should have been charged.

What Is Capitalization in Accounting?
In accounting, typically a purchase is recorded in the time accounting period in which it was bought. However, some expenses, such as office equipment, may be usable for several accounting periods beyond the one in which the purchase was made. These fixed assets are recorded on the general ledger as the historical cost of the asset. As a result, these costs are considered to be capitalized, not expensed. A portion of the cost is then recorded during each quarter of the item's usable life in a process called depreciation. 

What Is Capitalization in Finance?
In finance, capitalization is the company's capital structure. It is the book value cost of capital, or the total of a company's long-term debt, stock, and retained earnings. A company that is said to be undercapitalized does not have the capital to finance all obligations. Overcapitalization occurs when outside capital is determined to be unnecessary as profits were high enough and earnings were underestimated. 

What Kinds of Costs Can Be Capitalized?
Any costs that benefit future periods should be capitalized and expensed, so as to reflect the lifespan of the item or items being purchased. Costs that can be capitalized include development costs, construction costs, or the purchase of capital assets such as vehicles or equipment.

The Bottom Line
Capitalizing in business is to record an expense on the balance sheet in a way that delays the full recognition of the expense, often over a number of quarters or years. The process is used for the purchase of fixed assets that have a long usable life, such as equipment or vehicles. In finance, capitalization is also an assessment of a company's capital structure.

Related Terms
Accumulated Depreciation: Everything You Need To Know
Accumulated depreciation is the cumulative depreciation of an asset up to a single point in its life. more
Capitalization: What It Means in Accounting and Finance
Capitalization is an accounting method in which a cost is included in the value of an asset and expensed over the useful life of that asset. more
Capitalized Interest: Definition and Example
Capitalized interest is the cost of borrowing to acquire or construct a long-term asset, which is added to the cost basis of the asset on the balance sheet. more
Capitalized Cost: Definition, Example, Pros and Cons
A capitalized cost is an expense that is added to the cost basis of a fixed asset on a company's balance sheet. more